
1. Toxicol Sci. 1999 Mar;48(1):100-6.

d-Fenfluramine produces neuronal degeneration in localized regions of the cortex,
thalamus, and cerebellum of the rat.

Schmued L(1), Slikker W, Clausing P, Bowyer J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurotoxicology, National Center for Toxicological Research,
Jefferson, Arkansas 72079, USA.

d-Fenfluramine is a potent serotonin (5-HT) reuptake inhibitor/releaser and,
until its recent recall, was prescribed as an anoretic agent. This study
demonstrates that 10 mg/kg d-fenfluramine i.p., when administered to rats in a
warm (27 degrees C) environment, produces neuronal degeneration within select
brain regions. Degeneration was detected and localized using a recently developed
fluorescent marker of neuronal degeneration, Fluoro-Jade. The most extensive
cortical damage was in the anterior cingulate region. In the medial thalamus,
degeneration was frequently seen within the intralaminar nuclei, and somewhat
less frequently observed within the paraventricular nucleus, the mediodorsal
nucleus, and the gelatinosis nucleus. Cerebellar damage occurred primarily in
medial Purkinje cells and occasionally in granule cells or basket cells.
Degeneration was not observed in either saline-injected control animals or in
rats given even higher doses of 25 mg/kg d-fenfluramine but kept in a cooler
environment (23 degrees C). The degeneration was clearly most prominent in
animals with body temperatures of 41 degrees to 42 degrees C, but this
degeneration was not seen in animals given saline that became extremely
hyperthermic in a 37 degrees C environment. Behavioral signs such as tremors,
myoclonus, rigidity, and splayed legs were seen in all animals with extensive
neurodegeneration. The areas damaged by d-fenfluramine, when hyperthermia occurs,
could play a role in the expression of the serotonin syndrome. Elevated
extracellular 5-HT levels alone are probably not sufficient for neurotoxicity,
and additional factors such as hyperthermia, regional specificity of 5-HT
receptor subtypes, blood flow, and/or neuronal networks may be involved.

PMID: 10330689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

