
1. Neuroscience. 1999;92(3):1011-23.

The distribution of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine "Ecstasy"-induced c-fos
expression in rat brain.

Stephenson CP(1), Hunt GE, Topple AN, McGregor IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Rats were injected with 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine ("Ecstasy") and
assessed for changes in locomotor activity and for the expression of the
immediate early gene c-fos throughout the brain. A dose-dependent increase in
locomotor activity was seen with 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (0, 5 and 20
mg/kg) that continued for at least 2 h following administration. Dose-dependent
increases in c-fos expression were seen in much of the cortex, forebrain,
brainstem and cerebellum in rats given 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine.
Expression was pronounced in 5-hydroxytryptamine terminal regions including the
medial prefrontal cortex, caudate-putamen, nucleus accumbens, olfactory tubercle,
islands of Calleja, lateral septum, paraventricular hypothalamus and
paraventricular thalamus. High levels of c-fos expression were also seen in the
supraoptic and median preoptic nuclei, regions involved in the control of fluid
balance and body temperature, respectively. This is potentially important since
deaths in 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine users have been linked to
hyperthermia and hyponatremia. In the brainstem, two regions of high c-fos
expression were Barrington's nucleus, which is involved in micturition, and the
pontine reticular nucleus oralis, a region involved in motor control of
mastication. Activation of this latter structure may partly explain the bruxism
(grinding of the jaw) reported by human 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine users. 
Robust c-fos expression was seen in the cerebellum, particularly in the
flocculus, and this may explain the reported deleterious effects of
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine on balance and co-ordination. Significant c-fos
expression was also seen in the ventral tegmental area, amidst the cell bodies of
mesolimbic and mesocortical dopamine neurons, and in the median and dorsal raphe,
where the serotonergic innervation of the forebrain originates. Double-labelling 
of fos-positive neurons with 5-hydroxytryptamine showed that only a small number 
of serotonergic neurons in the raphe expressed c-fos following
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine. The widespread distribution of
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-induced c-fos expression seen in this study can
be linked to the profound alterations in physiological function, mood and
behaviour produced by this drug.

PMID: 10426541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

