
1. Brain Res. 1999 Oct 16;845(1):60-7.

Differential forebrain c-fos mRNA induction by ether inhalation and novelty:
evidence for distinctive stress pathways.

Emmert MH(1), Herman JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky Medical Center,
800 Rose Street, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.

Previous studies indicate the existence of subtypes of stressors invoking
distinct patterns of neuronal integration. Pathways activated by stress appear to
depend on whether the perceived threat is processive/neurogenic or systemic in
nature. To test this hypothesis, the present study compares magnitude and extent 
of c-fos mRNA induction in response to novelty (open field (OF), representing a
processive stressor) or ether exposure (representing a systemic stressor).
Exposure to the OF or ether fumes both produced increases in plasma
corticosterone (CORT) levels; notably, peak levels of secretion were elevated in 
the ether group, suggestive of augmented HPA secretory activity to this stressor.
In situ hybridization analysis of c-fos mRNA induction reveals common and
divergent activational properties in the two stress groups. The extent of c-fos
mRNA expression was similar in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN), despite
stress-related differences in CORT secretion. Analysis of the dorsomedial
hypothalamic nucleus, suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and limbic sites,
specifically, the lateral septum and medial amygdaloid nucleus, indicate greater 
c-fos mRNA induction in animals exposed to OF stress. The frontoparietal cortex
was only forebrain region showing differential activation by ether. Differential 
c-fos induction was not observed in the medial preoptic area (ventrolateral
quadrant), paraventricular thalamus, dorsolateral striatum or hippocampus. The
results indicate that processive and systemic stressors differ not only in the
patterning of neuronal activation in the CNS, but also in the extent to which
selected stress-sensitive regions are induced.

PMID: 10529444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

